---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/citations/different-strokes-for-different-folks-comparing-u-s-groups-openness-to-pro-animal-actions-faunalytics/","created":"2026-01-28T10:51:00.423+00:00","updated":"2026-01-28T10:51:00.441+00:00"}
---

This Faunalytics study examines a broad range of demographics and shows how advocates working with specific groups can craft asks that are most likely to appeal to them.

### Key Findings
1.  **The groups who are most and least likely to take pro-animal actions are often divided along political lines.** For example, 84% of Democrats would vote for a ballot measure aimed at improving conditions for farmed animals compared to only 56% of Republicans. This gap is also visible between people on both sides of a politicized issue like climate change. For example, 68% of people who believe climate change is a serious problem are likely to sign a farmed animal welfare petition compared to only 35% of people who are not concerned about climate change.
2.  **Being concerned about climate change could make more of a difference in someone’s openness to many pro-animal actions than being an animal lover.** As you might expect, people who identified as animal lovers were much more open to pro-animal actions than non-animal lovers. However, the differences between climate-concerned people and non-climate-concerned people were often even bigger. For example, climate-concerned people were 45 percentage points more supportive of Meatless Monday school lunch policies than non-climate-concerned people. Animal lovers were only 19 percentage points more likely to support this type of policy than non-animal lovers.
3.  **Black, Indigenous, and People of the Global Majority (BIPGM) individuals are often more open to pro-animal actions than white people.** However, the degree of openness depends on the action. For example, Black participants reported the highest likelihood of removing beef and pork from their diets (27%), going pescatarian (21%), and going vegan (12%), but were not among the groups most open to most non-diet actions. Hispanic or Latino/a/x participants were the second most likely to share a post related to farm animal welfare on social media (45%) or attend a protest or demonstration (29%), and other BIPGM participants were among the most likely to use a plant-based protein as the main protein in a meal (58%), order a vegetarian entrée at a restaurant (52%), and purchase a meat substitute (43%). In contrast, white participants were not among the most likely groups to take any of the pro-animal actions studied.
4.  **People are most open to simple actions that result in institutional change.** Overall, we estimate that people in the U.S. are most open to voting for a ballot measure designed to improve conditions for farmed animals, signing a petition aimed at improving farmed animal welfare, and supporting Meatless Mondays in schools. Over 60% of the U.S. public said they would vote for a farmed animal-focused ballot measure, sign a farmed animal-focused petition, or support a Meatless Mondays school lunch policy.
5.  **Speciesism varies across characteristic groups.** Non-animal lovers, people who aren’t concerned about climate change, conservatives, and Republicans had the highest levels of speciesism, while people outside the gender binary, liberals, women, Hispanic or Latino/a/x people, and Democrats had the lowest levels of speciesism.