---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/citations/how-to-message-plant-based-diets-and-products-in-southeast-asia-a-social-media-analysis-faunalytics/","created":"2026-01-28T10:56:29.062+00:00","updated":"2026-01-28T10:56:29.121+00:00"}
---

Southeast Asia is a critical region for animal advocacy, especially for plant-based diet change. This study identifies key audiences there, examines their influences, and pinpoints messages that may resonate best.

### Key Findings
1.  **Key consumer segments that show an openness toward plant-based diets in Southeast Asia tend to be higher income, well educated, health conscious, and older than 55.** While specific segments may vary across countries, advocates should consider targeting these groups with diet-change campaigns. People looking for protein diversification and to reduce red meat may also be most interested in plant-based meat alternatives.
2.  **The three biggest motivations for adopting plant-based diets are health (43% of total motivation mentions), animal protection (17%), and environment (12%) — but barriers persist.** For example, while users mentioned disease prevention, weight management, and overall well-being as **health motivations**, 23% of mentions related to barriers to adoption of plant-based diets expressed skepticism about nutritional sufficiency, energy, and protein. **Animal protection** and ethical concerns were the second-biggest motivation, but this motivation appears to be primarily driven by passionate supporters of the cause rather than mainstream consumers, which suggests that the influence of such narratives may be limited. Finally, consumers linked plant-based diets to reducing carbon emissions and deforestation and mitigating climate disasters. However, some dissenting voices challenge the **environmental impact** of animal agriculture, arguing that livestock contributes to soil regeneration and food resilience.
3.  **Common Southeast Asian religions — including Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam — have different impacts on attitudes to plant-based diets, both positive and negative.** Buddhism and Hinduism encourage plant-based diets, with many followers committing to vegetarianism during religious holidays and as acts of thanksgiving. This motivation was particularly strong in Malaysia and Thailand, where 12% of motivation-related posts referenced religious reasons for meat reduction. In contrast, Islamic traditions like sacrificial slaughter and strong cultural beliefs around meat can act as a barrier to meat reduction, particularly in Indonesia and Malaysia, where 12% of barrier-related posts referenced religious norms.
4.  **Cost and accessibility concerns deter many consumers across Southeast Asia, but cost-savings from adopting plant-based diets are also a motivation for a few consumers in Indonesia and Vietnam.** Around 16% of barrier-related posts cited cost as a major deterrent. Plant-based meat is significantly more expensive than meat in many countries, and is viewed as a luxury. However, a minority of social posts in Indonesia and Vietnam (3%) referenced reducing meat due to rising prices, suggesting an opportunity to position plant-based diets as cost-effective in some markets.
5.  **Negative perceptions of pro-plant-based advocates can create resistance, especially in Singapore and Thailand.** Roughly 10% of barrier-related posts expressed negative views of vegans and plant-based advocates, describing them as judgmental, overly critical, or idealistic.
6.  **Meat cravings and taste preferences limit long-term adoption for some, particularly in the Philippines, but many who have embraced plant-based diets see taste more as a motivator than a barrier.** About 7% of barrier-related posts in the Philippines specifically referenced meat cravings, the highest among all study countries. Taste remains an issue, but mostly for those unfamiliar with plant-based alternatives. Among those who have embraced plant-based diets, taste was five times more likely to be mentioned as a motivation than a barrier in their social media posts.
7.  **Key sources of influence for opinions on plant-based diets are celebrities (21% of total mentions), news and media (13%), and advocacy groups (12%).** Other sources included academia, brands, religious leaders, supranational organizations (e.g., the UN, WHO), local communities, and governments.