---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/citations/ivanova-et-al-2020/","created":"2025-10-23T17:42:46.245+01:00","updated":"2025-10-23T18:06:08.927+01:00"}
---

#environment_ghg  #meat #citation 


https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ab8589?fbclid=IwAR15jlGvBgL7b8vIj1qa3sHZ-0ci_2oGBxqONCYSEUq0bw4U8rsMdSJLLF4

Ivanova, D., Barrett, J., Wiedenhofer, D., Macura, B., Callaghan, M., & Creutzig, F. (2020). Quantifying the potential for climate change mitigation of consumption options. _Environmental Research Letters_, _15_(9), 093001.
## Abstract

**Background.** Around two-thirds of global GHG emissions are directly and indirectly linked to household consumption, with a global average of about 6 tCO2eq/cap. The average per capita carbon footprint of North America and Europe amount to 13.4 and 7.5 tCO2eq/cap, respectively, while that of Africa and the Middle East—to 1.7 tCO2eq/cap on average. Changes in consumption patterns to low-carbon alternatives therefore present a great and urgently required potential for emission reductions. In this paper, we synthesize emission mitigation potentials across the consumption domains of food, housing, transport and other consumption. **Methods.** We systematically screened 6990 records in the Web of Science Core Collections and Scopus. Searches were restricted to (1) reviews of lifecycle assessment studies and (2) multiregional input-output studies of household consumption, published after 2011 in English. We selected against pre-determined eligibility criteria and <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">quantitatively synthesized findings from 53 studies </mark>in a meta-review. We identified 771 original options, which we summarized and presented in <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">61 consumption options with a positive mitigation potential</mark>. We used a fixed-effects model to explore the role of contextual factors (geographical, technical and socio-demographic factors) for the outcome variable (mitigation potential per capita) within consumption options. **Results and discussion.** We establish consumption options with a high mitigation potential measured in tons of CO2eq/capita/yr. For transport, the options with the highest mitigation potential include living car-free, shifting to a battery electric vehicle, and reducing flying by a long return flight with a median reduction potential of more than 1.7 tCO2eq/cap. <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">In the context of food, the highest carbon savings come from dietary changes, particularly an adoption of vegan diet with an average and median mitigation potential of 0.9 and 0.8 tCO2eq/cap, respectively.</mark> Shifting to renewable electricity and refurbishment and renovation are the options with the highest mitigation potential in the housing domain, with medians at 1.6 and 0.9 tCO2eq/cap, respectively. We find that the top ten consumption options together yield an average mitigation potential of 9.2 tCO2eq/cap, indicating substantial contributions towards achieving the 1.5 °C–2 °C target, particularly in high-income context.