---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/citations/jakobsen-et-al-2011/","tags":["#fish","#citation"],"created":"2025-10-23T17:42:46.669+01:00","updated":"2025-10-23T18:06:08.952+01:00"}
---

#fish #citation 

Jakobsen, M. U., Due, K. M., Dethlefsen, C., Halkjaer, J., Holst, C., Forouhi, N. G., ... & Overvad, K. (2012). Fish consumption does not prevent increase in waist circumference in European women and men. _British journal of nutrition_, _108_(5), 924-931.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/british-journal-of-nutrition/article/fish-consumption-does-not-prevent-increase-in-waist-circumference-in-european-women-and-men/BDE1E00EA8566CA45C13AF93F6BC69F3

- [[The small body problem\|The small body problem]]

Fish consumption is the major dietary source of EPA and DHA, which according to rodent experiments may reduce body fat mass and prevent obesity. However, <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">human studies have suggested that fish consumption has no appreciable association with body-weight gain.</mark> We investigated the associations between fish consumption and subsequent change in waist circumference. Sex, age and waist circumference at enrolment were considered as potential effect modifiers. Women and men (<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">n = 89,432</mark>) participating in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">were followed for a median of 5·5 years</mark>. Mixed-effect linear regression was used to investigate the associations between fish consumption and subsequent change in waist circumference. Among all participants, the average annual change in waist circumference was − 0·01 cm/10 g higher total fish consumption per d (95 % CI − 0·01, 0·00) and − 0·01 cm/10 g higher fatty fish consumption per d (95 % CI − 0·02, − 0·01), after adjustment for potential confounders. Lean fish consumption was not associated with change in waist circumference. Adjustment for potential over- or underestimation of fish consumption measurements did not systematically change the observed associations, but the 95 % CI became slightly wider. The results in subgroups from analyses stratified by sex, age or waist circumference at enrolment were not systematically different. In conclusion, <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">the present study suggests that fish consumption does not prevent increase in waist circumference.</mark>