---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/citations/mood-et-al-2024/","created":"2026-02-11T09:15:02.301+00:00","updated":"2026-02-11T09:15:02.456+00:00"}
---

Finfishes are caught from the wild for food, feed (often in the form of fishmeal and oil) and bait. According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), between 74 and 83 million tonnes (averaging 77 million tonnes) were caught annually in 2000–2019. Although fishes are now widely recognised as sentient beings, capture is still quantified as biomass rather than number of individuals (in contrast to wild-caught marine mammals and crocodiles; and farmed mammals and birds). Here, we estimate global numbers of wild-caught finfishes using FAO capture production (landing) tonnages (2000–2019 data) and estimates of mean individual weight at capture, based on internet-sourced capture and market weights. We estimate that between 1,100 and 2,200 billion (1.1–2.2 × 1012), or 1.1–2.2 trillion, wild finfishes were caught annually, on average, during 2000–2019. Anchoveta (Engraulis ringens) comprised 28%, by estimate midpoint. Estimated numbers in 2019, totalling 980–1,900 billion, were lower due to reduced anchoveta landings, but still represented 87.5% of vertebrate numbers killed for food or feed, as obtained or estimated from FAO data. These figures exclude unrecorded capture such as illegal fishing, discards and ghost fishing. Estimated finfish numbers used for reduction to fishmeal and oil represented 56% of the total 2010 estimate (1,000–1,900 billion), by midpoint. It is recommended that the FAO reports fish capture numbers. The welfare of wild-caught fishes, which is generally very poor during and after capture, should be addressed as part of sustainable utilisation of aquatic resources.