---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/citations/research-summary-farmed-cricket-welfare-rethink-priorities/","tags":["insects"],"created":"2025-10-23T11:04:10.863+01:00","updated":"2025-10-23T11:04:10.997+01:00"}
---

<ul><li>As of 2020, around 370 to 420 billion crickets and grasshoppers were farmed annually for food and feed, though today the number may be much higher.</li><li>Rowe et al. (2024) is the first publication to consider species-specific welfare concerns for several species of crickets on industrialized insect farms.</li><li>The authors identify 15 current and 5 future welfare concerns, and make recommendations for reducing the harms from these concerns. These concerns include:<ul><li><strong>Stocking density</strong><ul><li>High stocking densities can increase the rates of aggression, cannibalism, and behavioral repression among individuals on cricket farms.</li></ul></li><li><strong>Disease</strong><ul><li>Diseases are relatively common on cricket farms. Common diseases, such as <i>Acheta domesticus</i> densovirus, can cause up to 100% cricket mortality.</li></ul></li><li><strong>Slaughter</strong><ul><li>Common slaughter methods for crickets on farms include freezing in air, blanching/boiling, and convection baking. Little is known about the relative welfare costs of these methods, and the best ways for a producer to implement a given method.</li></ul></li></ul></li><li>Future concerns that haven’t yet been realized on farms include:<ul><li><strong>Novel feed substrates</strong><ul><li>Farmers have explored potentially giving crickets novel feeds, including food waste. This might be nutritionally inadequate or introduce diseases or other issues onto farms.</li></ul></li><li><strong>Selective breeding and genetic modification</strong><ul><li>In vertebrate animals, selective breeding has caused a large number of welfare issues. The same might be expected to become true for crickets.</li></ul></li></ul></li></ul>