---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/citations/wyma-et-al-2025/","tags":["#africa policy health_nutrition"],"created":"2025-10-23T17:42:45.934+01:00","updated":"2025-10-23T18:12:10.229+01:00"}
---

Food-based dietary guidelines (FBDGs) are powerful country-level policies that can guide healthy diets from sustainable food systems. They are associated with several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly SDG 2 (zero hunger), SDG 3 (good health and well-being) and SDG 13 (climate action). However, most FBDGs still favour animal-based food consumption despite increasing global adoption of plant-based dietary patterns to meet health and climate targets. Our objectives were to review the extent of African FBDGs and to analyse their inclusivity of plant-based dietary patterns. A state-of-the-art literature review was conducted, including qualitative analysis and quantitative scoring using the Balanced Food Choice Index system. We found that 12 African countries had FBDGs, although these contained less information about plant-based dietary patterns than the global average. The most balanced guidelines were from South Africa, Namibia, Benin, Gabon and Zambia. One-quarter of FBDGs in Africa refer to the sustainability of plant-based foods or dietary patterns. However, there was a significant lack of awareness of some forms of plant-based diets, with only two FBDGs discussing vegetarian diets. Five African dietary guidelines included plant-based alternatives to meat, milk or dairy. Future African FBDGs are encouraged to be inclusive of plant-based dietary choices and balance the various health, economic, environmental and ethical aspects that play a role in people’s food choices.

**Significance:**
*   We reviewed food-based dietary guidelines (FBDGs) in Africa, finding a considerable shortfall in official recommendations for the broad spectrum of plant-based diets. Only 12 African countries have FBDGs, representing one-quarter of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) member countries from Africa.
*   According to our analysis, sustainability is included in one-quarter of African guidelines, because they explain the environmental benefits of plant-based foods or dietary patterns. Two guidelines discuss vegetarian diets, and five guidelines include plant-based alternatives to meat, milk or dairy.