---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/bsg-2022/","tags":["environment/GHG","alternative_proteins/precision_fermentation"],"created":"2025-10-23T17:42:43.799+01:00","updated":"2025-10-30T23:27:44.228+00:00"}
---
 

- [[Alternative proteins are better for the environment\|Alternative proteins are better for the environment]]
- [[Alt proteins are underfunded\|Alt proteins are underfunded]]

"The Untapped Climate Opportunity in Alternative Proteins"

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2022/combating-climate-crisis-with-alternative-protein

1. **Market Growth of Alternative Proteins**: By 2035, alternative proteins are expected to capture 11% of the global protein market, potentially reaching 22% with technological and regulatory support. The market value could hit $290 billion.
3. **Climate Impact**: A shift to alternative proteins could reduce global CO2e emissions by 0.85 gigaton by 2030, equivalent to decarbonizing 95% of the aviation sector.
4. **Investment Trends**: Venture capital in alternative proteins grew from $1 billion in 2019 to $5 billion in 2021. Investment in fermentation-based and animal-cell-based technologies saw significant rises of 137% and 425%, respectively.
5. **Consumer Preferences**: 75% of consumers cite health as the main reason for adopting alternative proteins, but taste and price remain key factors. Over 30% of consumers would switch to alternative proteins for climate benefits.
6. **Economic Efficiency**: Investing in alternative proteins yields the highest CO2e savings per dollar compared to other sectors. The potential impact return on capital employed (IoCE) is estimated at $221 to $354 billion per trillion dollars invested, three times higher than other high-emitting sectors.